Gill's Exposition of the Entire Bible
And he said unto them, take nothing for your journey,.... Throughout the towns and cities of Judea, where they were sent to preach the Gospel:

neither staves, The Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental versions, read in the singular number, "neither staff, rod, or club"; and so it was in one of Beza's ancient copies, but in all the rest in the plural, as in Matthew; which last must be the true reading, since one staff was allowed, according as in Mark 6:8 though more than one were forbidden:

nor scrip; or bag to put provision in; See Gill on Matthew 10:10.

Neither bread, neither money; gold, silver, or brass, to buy bread with; because they were to have it, wherever they came, given them, as their due, and the reward of their labour;

neither have two coats apiece; the word "apiece" is left out in one copy, nor is it expressed in the Vulgate Latin and the eastern versions, which read as in Matthew 10:10 though the word does aptly and clearly express the sense of the prohibition, which was not that they should not have two coats among them, but not two apiece; or each man should not have two, or have change of raiment; See Gill on Matthew 10:10


Expositor's Greek Testament
Luke 9:3. The instructions in this and the next two verses follow pretty closely the version in Mk.—μηδὲν αἴρετε εἰς τὴν ὁδόν: as in Mk., but in direct speech, while Mk.’s is indirect (ἵνα μ. αἴρωσιν.)—μήτε ῥάβδον: Lk. interprets tie prohibition more severely than Mk. Not a staff (Mk. except a staff only).—ἀργύριον, silver, for Mk.’s χαλκόν: silver the common metal for coinage among the Greeks, copper among the Romans.—δύο χιτῶνας, two tunics each, one on and one for change.—ἔχειν: infinitive, after αἴρετε, imperative. It may be a case of the infinitive used as an imperative, of which one certain instance is to be found in Php 3:16 (στοιχεῖν = walk), or it may be viewed as a transition from direct to indirect speech (so most commentators). Bengel favours the first view.
Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges
3. And he said unto them] For a much fuller account of the instructions given to the Twelve see Matthew 10:5-15. Some of these are recorded by St Luke as given also to the Seventy, Luke 10:1-16.
neither staves] Or a staff (as N, A, B, and many uncials). The plural may have been frivolously introduced by some copyist who wished to avoid an apparent discrepancy with Mark 6:8, “save a staff only.” St Matthew also says, ‘not even a staff.’ Minute and wholly unimportant as the variation would have been, it may turn on the fact that our Lord told them not specially to procure (μὴ κτήσησθε, Matt.) these things for the journey; or on the fact that speaking in Aramaic He used the phrase כי אם (kee im), which might be explained ‘even if you have a staff it is unnecessary.’
nor scrip] i.e. wallet, a bag carried over the shoulder to contain a few dates or other common necessaries. 1 Samuel 17:40.
neither dread] which they usually took with them, Luke 9:13; Matthew 16:7.
neither money] Literally, “silver.” St Luke uses the word because it was the common metal for coinage among the Greeks. St Mark uses “copper,” the common Roman coinage.
neither have two coats apiece] i.e. do not carry with you a second tunic (ketoneth)—which indeed is a rare luxury among poor Orientals. (See on Luke 3:11.) If they carried a second tunic at all they could only do so conveniently by putting it on (Mark 6:9). St Mark adds that they were to wear sandals, and St Matthew that they were not to have travelling shoes (hupodimata). The general spirit of the instructions merely is, Go forth in the simplest, humblest manner, with no hindrances to your movements and in perfect faith; and this, as history shews, has always been the method of the most successful missions. At the same time we must remember that the wants of the Twelve were very small (see on Luke 8:3) and were secured by the open hospitality of the East (Thomson, Land and Book, p. 346).
