Ellicott's Commentary for English Readers
(44-45) Let these sayings sink down.—See Notes on Matthew 17:22-23, and Mark 9:30-32. Literally, Set these sayings in your ears; but the English version is quite adequate as an idiomatic rendering.

Shall be delivered.—Literally, is about to be delivered.


Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary
44. these sayings—not what was passing between them about His grandeur [Meyer, &c.], but what He was now to repeat for the second time about His sufferings [De Wette, Stier, Alford, &c.]; that is, "Be not carried off your feet by all this grandeur of Mine, but bear in mind what I have already told you, and now distinctly repeat, that that Sun in whose beams ye now rejoice is soon to set in midnight gloom." "The Son of man," says Christ, "into the hands of men"—a remarkable antithesis (also in Mt 17:22, and Mr 9:31).

Expositor's Greek Testament
Luke 9:44. μέλλει παραδίδοσθαι, is about to be betrayed. Lk. gives the specialty of the second prediction as in the parallels. Where he fails in comparison with Mt. and Mk. is in grasping the psychological situation the emotional state of Christ’s mind. Cf. remarks on Mk., ad loc. Lk.’s Christ is comparatively passionless.
Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges
44. shall be delivered] Rather, is about to be delivered (i.e. very soon).
Bengel's Gnomen
Luke 9:44. Ὑμεῖς, ye) It is a secret hidden from others.[85]—εἰς τὰ ὦτα, into your ears) The first degree of comprehension: the heart of the disciples was still less capable of comprehending this matter. See Luke 9:45.—τούτους, these) This may also be referred to what precedes.—παραδίδοσθαι, delivered up) He hereby produces an equilibrium in their thoughts, which are thus evenly balanced between His glory on the one hand, and His Passion on the other. Comp. what goes before this ver., and also Luke 9:35; Luke 9:20; Luke 9:22. In joy we are to remember the cross: and the knowledge of His Majesty is a preparation for receiving the word of the cross.
[85] It proved to be hid also from the disciples themselves, Luke 9:45.—ED. and TRANSL.
Luke 9:44
Vincent's Word Studies
Let these sayings sink down into your ears

Lit., put these sayings into your ears.

Shall be delivered (μέλλει παραδίδοσθαι)

Rather, is about to be delivered.

