Ellicott's Commentary for English Readers
(2) My goodness·—Or, my lovingkindness, or my grace, a shortened form of “God of my grace” (Psalm 59:10; Psalm 59:17). The expression is exactly analogous to the term” grace,” applied to kings as the source of grace or mercy. For the other epithets, see Psalm 18:2.

Who subdueth.—Psalm 18:47; but the verb is different (cognate with 2Samuel 22:48), and here the singular, “my people,” instead of “my peoples.” Some MSS. indeed have the plural here, and the Syriac and Chaldee followed them, or changed to suit Psalms 18. If we had the historical incidents out of which the psalm sprung we might account for the change.

Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges
2. Cp. Psalm 18:2; Psalm 18:47, and notes there.
My goodness] Rather, my lovingkindness, a bold expression for the God of my lovingkindness (Psalm 59:10; Psalm 59:17), to denote Jehovah as the sum and source of lovingkindness. A partial parallel may be found in Jonah 2:8, but in view of the fact that the verse is almost wholly derived from Psalms 18, it seems not improbable that we should read as in Psalm 18:1, my strength (חזקי for חסרי), or as in Psalm 18:2, my cliff (סלעי), which agrees better with the next epithet my fortress or stronghold.
my deliverer] Lit. my deliverer for me, as in 2 Samuel 22:2. In Psalms 18 for me is omitted.
my shield, and he in whom I have taken refuge] A somewhat awkward variation from the text in Psalms 18, “my rock in whom I take refuge, my shield.”
who subdueth my people under me] The phrase resembles the text of 2 Samuel 22:48 (who bringeth down) more closely than that of Psalm 18:47 (and led subject, a different word from that used here). Instead of my people both texts read peoples, which is supported by some MSS and several Versions (Aq. Syr. Jer. Targ.) here. If Israel is the speaker, this reading must be adopted here, and the reference must be to the subjugation of neighbouring nations: but if the leader of the community is speaking, the more difficult reading ‘my people,’ which is supported by the LXX, may be right. The reference will then be to his success in overcoming internal dissensions (cp. “the strivings of my people,” 2 Samuel 22:44) and the establishment of his authority.
Pulpit Commentary
Verse 2. - My goodness, and my fortress; my high tower, and my deliverer; my shield, and he in whom I trust. The general resemblance to Psalm 18:2 is striking, but there are peculiar and original touches which indicate the author, not the copyist. For instance, the expression, "my goodness," occurs nowhere else. Who subdueth my people under me. Another reading gives, "Who subdueth peoples under me." Either reading suits the circumstances of David, who had to subdue a great portion of his own people under him (2 Samuel 2:8-31; 2 Samuel 3:6-21), and also conquered many foreign nations (2 Samuel 8:1-14). Psalm 144:2
