Gill's Exposition of the Entire Bible
Saying, the son of man must suffer many things,.... In his person and character, in his soul and body, at the hands of God, and of men, and devils:

and be rejected of the elders, and chief priests, and Scribes; who made up the grand sanhedrim of the nation: by these he was to be, and was rejected as the Messiah; and when put up with another which should be released, that other should be preferred, and he rejected; and which was done at the instigation of these men, who were the builders; of whom it was foretold that they should reject the head stone of the corner, Psalm 118:22

and be slain; or put to death, with the death of the cross:

and be raised the third day; according to the types and prophecies of the Old Testament. This he added for the comfort of his disciples.


Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges
22. The Son of man must suffer many things] It was necessary at once to dissipate the crude Messianic conceptions of earthly splendour and victory in which they had been brought up, and to substitute the truth of a suffering for that of a triumphant Messiah.
be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes] i.e. by each of the three great sections which formed the Jewish Sanhedrin; by all who up to that time had been looked upon as religious authorities in the nation.
and be slain] The mode of death, and the delivery to the Gentiles, were culminating horrors which He mercifully kept back till the last journey to Jerusalem, Matthew 20:19. Hitherto He had only spoken of His death in dim and distant intimations, John 2:19; John 3:14; John 6:51. His revelation of it was progressive, as they were able to bear it. Matthew 9:15; Matthew 10:38; John 3:14; Matthew 16:4; Matthew 16:21; Matthew 17:22; Matthew 20:18; Matthew 26:2.
be raised the third day] In Luke 9:45 St Luke shews us (as events proved)
Pulpit Commentary
Verse 22. - Saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain, and be raised the third day. "See how," as Riggenbach, quoted by Godet, says ('Vie de Jesus,' p. 318), "Jesus was obliged, in the very moment of self-revelation, to veil himself, when he had lighted the fire to cover it again." This dark and terrible prediction came upon the disciples evidently as something new. It was their Master's reply to their confession of faith in him. It said in other words, "You are right in your conception of me and my work. I am the promised King Messiah; but this part of my reign will be made up of affliction and mourning and woe. The great council of the people will reject me, and I shall only enter into my grand Messianic kingdom through the gate of suffering and of death. But do you, my own, be of good cheer. Three days after that death I shall rise again." The enumeration of "elders, chief priests, and scribes" is simply a popular way of describing the great council of the Jewish nation, the Sanhedrin, which was composed of these three important and influential sections of the people. Luke 9:22
Vincent's Word Studies
Be rejected (ἀποδοκιμασθῆναι)

The verb means to reject on scrutiny or trial, and therefore implies deliberate rejection.

Of the elders (ἀπό)

Lit., from the side of; on the part of.

